(upbeat music)
All right, now we're gonna learn about
creating HTML with strings and actually
the backtick strings that I've shown you earlier.
I really like this approach.
There's only one caveat is make sure you watch
this entire video all the way through,
'cause at the end I'm gonna show you
a potential security hole with using this method.
So, this method is actually what I use
in most of my Vanilla JavaScript applications.
This method is awesome, however,
there are some things you need to know about
specifically around the scary thing called XSS.
Cross-site scripting.
So, with that known don't just do 80% of this video
and then go build the next Facebook
and accidentally come back and say,
hey Wes, you didn't tell me about this.
'Cause you must listen to the
entire video so we know about XSS.
Okay so, let's get into it.
This is with innerHTML.
Let's create a new JavaScript file.
So, we'll call it creating with strings.js.
And let's just go into this and change it up.
Console.log it works.
And open that sucker up in your browser.
Does it work?
(laughs) Look at these little guys!
Cute!
It does work, good.
So, you can actually grab this property called innerHTML.
It's similar to innerText.
So, if I go ahead and grab one of these headings
that we have here, let's see here.
Let's grab anything with a class of item.
So, const item = document.querySelectorAll.
.querySelector not .querySelectorAll.
And we'll say anything with a class of item,
consol.log(item);.
What are we doing?
Good, we've got our item.
Now, if you take a look at the innerHTML
you see that that is a string of all the HTML
that makes up what's inside of it, right?
Okay, that makes sense.
That is a getter.
What if we use it as a setter?
I'm gonna say equals.
Let's use, in this case it doesn't matter if we use
single or backticks but I'm gonna set us up
for something in just a second.
Let's just replace it with an H1 tag
that says hey how are ya?
And now we see hey how are ya?
The inside of that div has been updated with some HTML.
Now, why does that work?
Well, if you set the innerHTML of an element
with just a string instead of a regular document.,
what were we doing here?
createElement, we're cloning them.
You see how this is kind of a long way to go about it?
The other way is you can actually just create the HTML
with text and then dump that HTML into the item.
And if it is valid HTML the browser will take it
and parse it and turn it into all of the items.
So, we can go multiple lines.
So, one benefit of using backticks over single or double
is that you can actually have multiple lines here.
And we could wrap that in maybe like a div.
By the way, this little expansion that I'm doing,
I have a thing called Emmet installed.
And then I have this.
There's a command called Expand Abbreviation.
So, when you're writing HTML you can do
things like div.item.item2.
And then you can expand the abbreviation.
And that will expand it out to the equivalent HTML.
It's pretty cool.
I will not be going over that all that much.
But that's what you're seeing when I do something like div.
I'm hitting my Control+E key.
That is not part of VS Code by default.
I had to go ahead and add that.
That keyboard shortcut myself
so you could expand the abbreviation, it's pretty handy.
So, we have a div here and so I did put an H1 tag.
And it actually doesn't matter if you
put all on one line or indent it.
But I find that writing it as if you're writing
just plain HTML makes it much more readable.
So, give that a save, open it up.
You see hey how are ya?
There's our div that we just created.
So, setting innerHTML into your element
is one way to just dump a string in
and have the browser create all of the elements for you.
Now, why would that be a little bit more useful
other than the fact that we don't have to do
all these document.createElement
and do all these appending and everything like that?
Because when you use backticks you can actually
interpolate values very easily.
So, if we had maybe a const src = `dog.jpg`.
Actually let's use this picsum URL ourselves.
And then we can go in here and say item.innerHTML.
Or maybe you can even put this in its own variable.
I like to do that.
So, maybe we'll say const myHTML is equal to backticks.
Inside of that we'll give ourselves a wrapper.
Inside of that we'll give ourselves an H2, says cute pup.
And then inside of here you want an image tag.
Now, what is cool about this is
if you use dollar sign curly brackets it allows us to
pop variables right into the template that we have.
So, we can say source is equal to the source variable.
And then maybe const desc = `Cute Pup`.
Then we can go in here and replace
that with the variable description.
And then in here we can also pop in that description.
You see how this is just templating?
This is how templating works in every
single framework that you're gonna use.
It looks a little bit different
in React or Angular or Ember or Vue
or Svelte or whatever you're using.
It looks a little bit different.
But it also sort of works the same way.
You template out your HTML, you put your variables where
you want them to go and then when we go ahead
and set the innerHTML of an element.
So, we can just set it to myHTML.
Go ahead and refresh it.
You'll see that we've got our element here 200.
We've got our H2 and we could even go a little bit further.
We could say that const width = 500;.
And we can interpolate the width into that.
And then in turn we put the source here.
And we get a much larger photo of 500, ah, it's right here.
So, I really like this approach.
There are a couple of downsides.
I'm gonna go into security in just a second
and another downside is that Ps are not elements.
Meaning that if I take this myHTML,
console.log(myHTML); and give it a console.log
you'll see that it is just a string.
We can confirm that by putting the type of in front of it.
And it tells us string.
Actually let's get this outta here.
Here we go, see it's just a string.
Now, that means that we can't do things
like myHTML.classList.add('special');.
It's gonna give us an error that says
cannot read property add of undefined.
And if we were just to console.log
the classList of that you see it's undefined.
Why?
Because myHTML is not an element.
It is only a string, it only becomes an element once we
dump it into the DOM by setting the innerHTML.
So, if you want to add event listeners,
which we're gonna learn.
If you wanna work with the classList.
If you wanna dynamically change any of the attributes,
like titles or alt or source to any of these elements,
it's not doable until you first dump it into the DOM.
And then you'd have to go ahead
and pull it out after the fact.
So, let's say this image right here,
I wanted to add a class to that.
Well, I'd have to go ahead and then select it,
itemImage = document.querySelector
we'll say ('.wrapper img'); console.log the image.
And null, what did I do?
Ta-ta-taa!
Let's try bring it back, can I grab just the wrapper?
No, it's not finding anything.
So, what happens if I run this just in the terminal?
Does it work?
Null.
Oh, you know what I did here?
So, this expansion it thinks that I'm writing React.
And when we're in React it actually
makes us use a className.
Hopefully that will change in the future in React.
That's a bit of an aside so that's a bit of
a goof up of mine, it should be just a pure class.
And then I bet if we bring this back to image it will work.
There we go, so there's our actual image.
You see that it's rendering on out.
Now, if I wanna go ahead and toggle classes on it
I could say, what were some of the fun images that we did?
Round?
Say, itemImage.classList.add('round');.
And there we go, you see it's giving a class of round to it.
So, that is one downside to it.
There is a couple of ways you can kinda get around that
and do the best of both worlds.
And that is with something called
document.createRange() and .createContextualFragment().
Ugh, I can't even say it all!
So, let's dive into how to do that real quick.
So, I'm gonna go ahead and remove this.
Remove the classList, remove the console.log.
And remove the item.innerHTML.
And we get rid of all of that!
So, let's see what we're working with.
Good, it just has a, we can get that it works off.
Of course it works!
Get that out of there too.
So, we have this myHTML, let's turn it into DOM element.
So, let's say turn a string into a DOM element.
And what we can do with that is we can say
const myFragment = document.createRange();.
And let's just see what we're working with.
What is myFragment equal to at this point?
And this creates something called a range.
A range is essentially just a collection of
elements or part of HTML that we can then work with.
So, that's exactly what we want.
We wanna take this HTML and we wanna make
a couple of what we call fragments.
So, what we do is we can append
from that range we can actually
just immediately call another method on that.
And we'll use the .createContextualFragment() method
that lives on the range and then you pass it a string.
So, we'll call myHTML.
So, now when we call that, it's getting a little long.
Let's see what we got working with here.
We get this thing that's called a #document-fragment.
And that's just a fancy way of saying some HTML, right?
We haven't done anything with it
but from this fragment we are then
able to access all of the elements that live inside of it.
So, we turned our HTML into true elements.
They still aren't on the page anywhere.
But now we have them as DOM elements.
And we can do things like myFragment.querySelector()
and we can look for an image inside of it.
Let's just console.log what that returns.
And you see that it's going to
return the image that lives inside of it.
Still not on the page but we're able to select the elements
that were previously just strings
and now have been magically turned into true DOM elements
or true DOM nodes that are on the page.
Then what we can do, is we can simply just use our existing
appends or insert a JSON HTML.
Things like that, we can use that to append them
to whatever it is that we want.
So, let's go ahead and document.body.append.
Let's try .appendChild() first,
make sure that works, myHTML.
This is fairly new, appendChild() is the existing one.
Does that work?
No, it doesn't.
I think it will work with .append.
Oh.
Oh (laughs)!
I just appended the raw string!
I wanna append the fragment, not that.
There we go, now it's being dumped in.
Does that mean that .appendChild will work as well?
Yes, so .appendChild will work.
Apologies for that!
So, you can use that as well as
any of the .insertAdjacent ones that we looked at earlier.
So, real quick, if you want to create HTML from a string you
can either dump it straight into an element with .innerHTML,
which we'll do in almost all cases.
Or if you do need to do things like
add event listeners, change classes, change attributes,
you can turn it into DOM nodes before it's dumped in.
With .createContextualFragment() where you pass it
a actual string, then go ahead and dump that into the body
or wherever it is that you want.
Now, so that is creating HTML with strings.
What we need to talk about real quick
is security and sanitization.
So, we will have an entire video on security later
in this course and I recommend that you
go check that out when it comes time.
But I wanted to show you what
the potential pitfalls are of this.
So, one potential pitfall is that
you could ask somebody what their name is from,
a pretty standard thing to do is
you'd have a profile and people
can edit their profile, they can change their name,
they can change their description.
And if somebody puts HTML into that
what can happen is that the HTML
will then be rendered onto the page.
So, let me show you a little example with this right here.
So, this description, let's say we're taking
this description from somebody.
Somebody could say it's a cute pup
and then they could put an H1 tag in and say love this guy.
Now when I refresh it you see that there is
actually an H1 tag that wasn't created from us.
Remember that this is probably coming from a database.
This is probably coming from somebody's
editor where they've typed it in.
And they went ahead and just started to put some HTML.
Well, that's cool.
Maybe what you could also do is
then they start doing a style tag.
And they could say * .
And now they've just hidden the entire page.
This is what Myspace was.
Myspace allowed you to put in your own style tags,
which was great but you could do anything that you want.
Now, I'm just assuming that I'm just
taking in a description from the user.
But they've jacked it and allowed them
to put any HTML on the page.
Which you may or may not want the user to do.
Now that's all fun and games until
you get into what is called XSS,
which is cross-site scripting.
Now, cross-site scripting is where people take this
a little further and they start to
introduce script tags into this part.
And then the browser will then run that script tag
and you can do anything you want.
Like drain somebody's bank account.
So, imagine if you were signing into your online banking.
And they had a little input.
And they say, hey, what's your name?
My name is Wes.
And then put you also said my last name is script tag.
And you could do anything you want inside of that.
Including draining someone's bank account.
Or deleting things, sending money, doing malicious acting.
So, a very simple example of that
is you have a description here
and you want to allow people to
put whatever they want inside of their description.
Including putting images.
So, maybe you have an image and you have a src=.
Let's do this picsum again.
And let's just do it really small.
Right here, cute pup.
You allow them to put a little image in.
So, that's okay, however,
if you hijack this onload event which is JavaScript.
And when the onload runs, you can run anything you want.
So, we could say alert('HACKED').
So, now what just happened is
you took data from the user and they have then,
you've allowed them to run any JavaScript
that they want on your website.
And that is a potential security hole
because imagine that on Facebook
you allowed somebody to run any JavaScript
that you could run a loop, you could have your friends
unfriend everybody, you could send malicious messages.
Any time you allow a third party
to run JavaScript on your page
that is a huge security hole.
The only JavaScript that should be running on your page
is JavaScript that is authored by you, the developer,
and from approved parties like Google Analytics.
Or something like that.
So, there's a potential, this is called
a cross-site scripting where they've injected it in.
And in the security video, what we're going to do is
to show you how you can scrub your HTML of any potential
security vulnerabilities like this before you then dump it.
Because this is a great, I like this a lot.
I love this approach to writing HTML.
It's really easy, it looks like HTML,
I can pop my variables in wherever I want.
You just have to be aware that this is
a potential vulnerability and we want to negate that.
And I'll show you how to do that in the security video.